---
title: '3.2 Arrays'
date: '2022-01-21'
categories:
 - algorithm
 - clang
 - data structure
tags: 
 - array
publish: true
---

An array is a ***fixed*** collection of ***same-type*** data that are stroed ***contiguously*** and that are accessible by an ***index***.  

We refer to the `i`th element of an array `a` as `a[i]`. It is the responsibility of the programmer to strore something meaningful in an array position `a[i]` before referring to `a[i]`.

Arrays are fundamental data structures in that they have a direct correspondence with memory systems on virtually all computers. To retrieve the contents of a word from memory in machine language, we provide an **address**. Thus, we could think of the entire computer **memory**  as an **array**, with the memory addresses corresponding to array indices. Most computer-languages processors translate programs that involve arrays into efficient machine-languages programs that access memory directly.

## 3.2.1 Sieve of Eratosthenes (埃拉托斯特尼筛法)

The **sieve of Eratosthenes** is an ancient [algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithm) for finding all [prime numbers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prime_number) up to any given limit. ([Sieve of Eratosthenes(wikipedia)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sieve_of_Eratosthenes))

It is typical of algorithms that exploit the fact that we can access efficiently any item of an array, given that item’s index.

```c
#define N 30

void printArray(int len,int a[]);

int main()
{
    int i, j, a[N];

    for (i = 2; i < N; i++)
    {
        a[i] = 1;
    }
    printArray(N,a);

    for (i = 2; i < N; i++)
    {
        if (a[i])
        {
            for (j = i; i * j < N; j++)
            {
                a[i * j] = 0;
            }
        }
    }
    printArray(N,a);

    for (i = 2; i < N; i++)
    {
        if (a[i])
        {
            printf("%4d", i);
        }
    }
    printf("\n");

    return 0;
}

void printArray(int len,int a[])
{
    printf("Array: \n\t");

    for (int i = 0; i < len; i++)
    {   
        printf("%2d ", i);
    }

    printf("\n\t");

    for (int i = 0; i < len; i++)
    {   
        printf("%2d ", a[i]);
    }
    printf("\n");
    return;
}
```

The goal of above program is to set `a[i]` to if `i` is prime, and to 0 if `i` is not prime. 

1. Set to 1 all array elements, to indicate that no numbers are known to be nonprime.
2. Set to 0 array elements corresponding to indices that are known to be nonprime (multiples of known primes). 
3. If `a[i]` is still 1 after all multiples of smaller primes have been set to 0, then we known it to be prime.

<center></center>

Becasue the program uses an array consisting of the simplest type of elements, 0-1 values, it would be more space **efficient** if we explicitly used an **array of bits**, rather than one of integers. Also, some programming environments might require the array to be global if *N* is huge, or we could allocate it dynamically.

## Reference

1. [Algorithms in C](https://www.amazon.com/Algorithms-Parts-1-4-Fundamentals-Structures-dp-0201314525/dp/0201314525/ref=mt_other?_encoding=UTF8&me=&qid=) 
2. [Sieve of Eratosthenes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sieve_of_Eratosthenes) wikipedia





